We've got all the core features that are related to authentication
implemented, now I want to work on the user experience a little bit at least. Right now when we login and
we for example try to login with invalid credentials where we don't find the email or the password
does not match or we try to create a user for whom the email already exists,
then we are just redirected without any error message being shown on the page.
Now I will dive deeper into how to validate user input in the validation module of the course but here
we're not talking about validation so much but really about giving some feedback to the user in general.
Now when rendering views with the render method as we are doing it here, including data that should be
rendered on the page was simple, by the way isAuthenticated
can be deleted here because we always include this as a local and
that is the case for all our routes
as a side note,
so you can remove that isAuthenticated thing from all render methods but this is not really what I wanted
to do here, it's a little side thing we can do though.
The main thing is that it's easy to pass data to our views inside of the render method as you can see,
it was never a problem to get our data into the views there.
However it is a huge problem if we want to pass some data into the rendered view when we are redirecting
as we are doing it here because upon a redirect, technically a new request is started, a new request to
/login in this case
and on that new request, we don't know that we got here because the user entered an invalid e-mail or
anything like that, when we triggered this new request
this is treated in the same way as a request that was triggered by clicking on the login button in our menu.
So we have no way of finding out if we want to display an error message or not
and hence in the render method of get login where we show that login page, we don't know if we want
to include some error message.
Now to solve that problem and store some data before we redirect which we then use in the brand new request
that is triggered by the redirect,
how could we do that? Well you learned if you want to store data across requests, you need a session.
So we can use a session for that
but of course I don't want to store the error message in the session permanently,
I want to add something to the error message, kind of flash it onto the session
and once the error message was then used, so once we pulled it out of the session and did something with
it, I want to remove it from the session
so that for subsequent requests, this error message is not part of the session anymore
and for this, we can use another package which makes this really easy.
We install that with npm install --save and then the package is called connect
-flash, if you hit enter,
this gets downloaded and added to your project, you can restart the server thereafter
and now connect flash is really simple to use.
First of all we initialize in our app.js folder, file, in there we install it or we import it just
as we import other packages,
you can store it in a constant which you name however you want, I'll name it flash and I will require
connect flash here. Now flash then needs to be registered
you could say, initialized, I'll do this here at the bottom,
you need to do it after you initialized the session, so certainly after this middleware, there I will
call use and I will simply call flash as a function here.
Now we can use that flash middleware anywhere in our application on the request object.
So now let's save that and
let's head over to auth.js and let's say here when we're logging in and we don't find a user with that
e-mail which is the problem here, we want to flash an error message into our session and
we do this now with request and there will be a flash method
now added by this package. This flash message now simply takes a key under which this message will be
stored,
we could name this error
and then the message
and in this case this would be invalid e-mail or password.
Now you could also say just invalid e-mail,
some people advocate not being as clear as people can
otherwise guess which part of the credentials was wrong,
I'd argue they can test this anyways by trying to sign up with that e-mail
but whatever you want, you can output or flash such an error message.
Now with that it's in session and it's in there until we use it.
Now we want to use it here when we do render the login page, here
I want to include an error message variable let's say
and that error message variable will simply pull that by using request flash again
and here we now just access the key for which we want to get the message.
So in my case that key is what I specified here,
error,
so now I can pull that message out with error.
So whatever I stored in error will now be retrieved and stored in error message and thereafter, this information
is removed from the session.
So now error message will be set and will hold a value only if we have an error flashed into our session
and therefore we can now move over to our view, to the login view and display the error message here.
Let's say above all of that I add a div
and for now let's make this really simple and just output our error message,
so here error message is the variable in which I'm storing it.
Obviously I want to check if that exists before I render this,
so I will wrap this with some ejs if statement where I check if error message,
this will not be treated as true if it's simply not defined so if we simply are not able to retrieve
anything
and then let's try to output it like this,
let's see if that works.
If I go back to my application and I reload that login page, that seems to work
and now let me enter an invalid email
and indeed I see invalid e-mail or password. If I do enter a valid email but an invalid password, I don't
see that because there I don't flash anything onto my session yet.
So this is working,
now let's quickly reformat that,
I'll do that in next lecture,
you can skip it and download the finished formatted code if you want to and thereafter, let's add this
in other useful places too.